JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
Gwen Ifill is away this week.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Presidential contenders
try to make it in New York, as
Bernie Sanders
wins his seventh straight
matchup over Hillary
Clinton.
Then: inside Kenya and the
country's rampant
corruption, where police bribe,
instead of
patrol, and nearly a billion
dollars of government
money goes missing.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The wealth gap
here makes the
corruption more egregious.
According to one
study, Kenyans pay on average 16
bribes every
month.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the legacy of
Jackie Robinson.
A new Ken Burns PBS documentary
tracks the
icon's journey from baseball
hero to civil
rights champion.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is a rare
week without
any primary voting anywhere, in
the 2016 presidential
race, but the campaigning grinds
on. And,
as the day's developments show,
the talk is
getting testier, especially over
the all-important
delegate numbers game.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: For the two
Democratic contenders
and the three Republicans, the
campaign is
now dominated by delegate wars.
GOP front-runner
Donald Trump leads by about 200
delegates.
But he phoned into FOX News this
morning to
complain that his lead should be
even bigger.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
As an example, South Carolina, I
won it by
a landslide, like a massive
landslide. And
now they're trying to pick off
those delegates
one by one. That's not the way
democracy is
supposed to work. What kind of a
system is
this? Now, I'm an outsider, and
I came into
the system, and I'm winning the
votes by millions
of votes. But the system is
rigged. It's crooked.
JOHN YANG: Adding to Trump's
frustration,
rival Ted Cruz's sweep of
Colorado's 34 delegates
over the weekend. Today, the
Texas senator
turned to California. Its June 7
primary is
suddenly vital in the race,
offering the single
biggest delegate prize for
Republicans: 172.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
California is going to decide
the Republican
nomination for president. And if
we continue
to unite, we will win the
general election,
beat Hillary Clinton and turn
this country
around!
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
JOHN YANG: Tensions are also
rising on the
Democratic side, now that Bernie
Sanders has
won seven of the last eight
contests.
In Binghamton, New York today,
he went after
Hillary Clinton on oil and gas
drilling.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
On this issue of fracking,
Secretary Clinton
and I have some very strong
differences of
opinion. If we are serious about
combating
climate change, we need to put
an end to fracking,
not only in New York and
Vermont, but all
over this country.
JOHN YANG: People in the Sanders
crowd booed
the mention of Clinton's name.
She took her
own shots at a stop in Queens.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
I have noticed that under the
bright spotlight
and scrutiny of New York,
Senator Sanders
has had trouble answering
questions. He's
had trouble answering questions
about his
core issue, namely, dealing with
the banks.
He's had trouble answering
foreign policy
questions.
JOHN YANG: Clinton still enjoys
a wide lead
in delegates, but Sanders
insists he can narrow
the gap.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news: British
prime Minister David Cameron
rejected criticism
of his family's finances and
offshore holdings.
He's come under fire after the
Panama Papers
leak detailed his late father's
investments.
But in Parliament today, Cameron
said his
father's investment fund was
designed to help
investors, not to dodge taxes.
DAVID CAMERON, British Prime
Minister: We
should differentiate between
schemes designed
to artificially reduce tax and
those that
are encouraging investment. Mr.
Speaker, this
is a government and this should
be a country
that believes in aspiration and
wealth creation.
So we should -- we should defend
the right
of every British citizen to make
money lawfully.
Aspiration and wealth creation
are not somehow
dirty words.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Cameron initially
refused to
say if he had a stake in his
father's business,
but he now acknowledges selling
his shares
before his election as prime
minister in 2010.
In Syria, a surge in fighting
now threatens
to derail a month-old
cease-fire. It's focused
around Aleppo, the country's
largest city.
Half of it is held by rebels.
Syrian army
video showed artillery firing on
rebel positions
on Sunday. There's also word
that government
reinforcements are moving in to
counter a
buildup of Islamist militants
linked to al-Qaida.
A fragile truce also hung in the
balance in
Yemen today, amid sporadic
violations. The
cease-fire took hold last night
between Shiite
rebels and a Saudi-led coalition
that backs
the government. The year-long
conflict has
killed more than 9,000 people,
and forced
nearly 2.5 million to flee.
Investigators in Southern India
are hunting
suspects after an illegal
fireworks display
sets off a deadly fire. At least
110 people
died and another 380 were hurt
in Sunday's
blaze at a Hindu temple. Amateur
video captured
explosions that rocked the
village of Paravoor,
as revelers celebrated the Hindu
new year.
Thousands of people were packed
inside the
complex.
John Kerry became the first U.S.
secretary
of state to visit Hiroshima,
Japan, where
the U.S. dropped an atomic bomb
in 1945. Kerry
toured the Hiroshima Peace
Museum and Memorial
as he attended a seven-nation
conference.
He spoke to reporters afterward.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: It is
a gut-wrenching display. It tugs
at all of
your sensibilities as a human
being. It reminds
everybody of the extraordinary
complexity
of choices in war, and of what
war does to
people, to communities, to
countries, to the
world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Kerry didn't say
whether President
Obama will visit Hiroshima when
he travels
to Japan in late May.
A sign today that the flow of
migrants from
Turkey into Greece is finally
slowing. Greek
officials say only 18 people
landed on outlying
islands in the last 24 hours.
Meanwhile, thousands
remain in camps near the border
with Macedonia.
A tense calm returned there
today, after police
tear-gassed crowds trying to
storm a crossing
on Sunday.
And Wall Street started off with
a rally,
but could not hold on. The Dow
Jones industrial
average lost 20 points to close
at 17556.
The Nasdaq fell 17 points, and
the S&P 500
slipped five.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
a closer
look at the candidates' scramble
for votes
in New York; how corruption
hurts a country's
citizen -- we go inside Kenya;
the paper trail
that connects Syria's president
to torture;
and much more.
With eight days to go until
vote-rich New
York weighs in on the
high-stakes contests
for the Republican and
Democratic nominations
for president, candidates
stepped up their
criticisms of each other and
made their best
cases for more delegates today,
the perfect
moment to turn to Politics
Monday with Tamara
Keith of NPR, and Amy Walter of
The Cook Political
Report.
And we welcome both of you.
So, as we said, no voting this
week, but delegate
selection goes on. And we're
hearing a lot
of complaining, Amy, from Donald
Trump. We
just heard him saying the
process is crooked.
What is Ted Cruz doing Donald
Trump isn't?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Right.
There is a process, and it
involves rules,
and Donald Trump seems to have
forgotten that
rules actually have been set a
long time ago.
But here's the two. There are
two ways to
win the nomination as a
Republican. You either
come into the convention with
1,237 delegates
-- that is where Trump is ahead
and where
he could -- there is still a
conceivable path
for him to do this by the time
we hit June,
tough, but conceivable.
Then there is winning the
convention at the
floor, winning by what we're
calling a contested
convention. That's where Ted
Cruz is doing
better. What Ted Cruz is doing
is, he understands
the rules and the nuances of how
the game
is played. And that is, when you
win a state,
you win more than just the
votes, you win
actual human beings, delegates
that go and
vote on the floor.
They are bound to voting for who
won that
state on the first round. But
once you get
into the second and third rounds
of voting,
most of them are free agents.
Ted Cruz is
making sure as many of his
supporters are
getting picked at these places
like Colorado
and in some other states, North
Dakota, et
cetera, to make sure, even in
South Carolina,
as he mentioned, that when we
get to that
second and third ballot, they're
going to
vote for Ted Cruz and not Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Tamara, if
it's a process
that's been written about, it's
been in the
books for some time, why has it
taken so long
for Donald Trump to focus on it?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Because
he was focused on winning.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: But this is all
about winning.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, yes, this is
a different
kind of winning and this is sort
of the more
complicated, procedural,
rule-type winning.
And, you know, at this
convention in Colorado,
Donald Trump showed up with a
gloss glossy
flyer that said here's my slate
of delegates,
vote for them. It included a
number of people
that were not on the ballot for
people to
vote.
It was -- my colleagues showed
me a copy of
his slate that he had taken
notes on, and
three-quarters of the people on
there, you
couldn't vote for them in the
way that Trump's
people said to vote for them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Amy, is it too
late for Trump
to catch up? He has hired this
veteran political
operative, Paul Manafort. He's
done some interviews.
We have seen him out over the
weekend. He
is saying, oh, yes, we are going
to catch
up. Is it -- can they catch up?
AMY WALTER: They may be able to,
but it's
really a question about, you
know, they have
already lost in so many of these
places and
it's hard to catch up.
What we're hearing in state
after state is
that the Cruz campaign has been
there for
months, they have been doing the
groundwork,
and they have the people there
who are able
to go and get on these ballots
or make sure
that they pick the right people
to get on
these ballots.
The one thing I want to mention
is, here's
the difficult part about all
this as we're
predicting and projecting what's
going to
happen; 2,500 people or so are
delegates.
They're all individual human
beings that all
are going to feel incredible
pressure. There
are rules that they have to
follow, but once
the ballot opens, once the
voting opens and
they're no longer bound by the
rules, they're
going to get pressures from the
candidates.
They're going to get pressures
from their
families, from their colleagues,
and these
people have to go home after
this convention
and go explain their vote to
their friends
and family, and that is going to
be something
none of us can predict.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, clearly,
Tamara, it sounds
like Donald Trump's best hope is
to get to
1,237 before they go to
Cleveland.
TAMARA KEITH: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
That is -- by far, if he can
have this done
in one ballot, that is a much
better solution.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's
mathematically possible.
TAMARA KEITH: It is
By our calculation at this
point, he would
need to get about 58 percent of
the remaining
unbound delegates. There are
bound delegates
and there are unbound delegates,
and so it's
somewhere between 58 percent and
70 percent
of the remaining delegates that
he needs to
get.
It's possible. There are a bunch
of winner-take-all
contests. But here's an
indication of the
challenge that he faces. In New
York, his
children cannot vote for him
because they
missed the deadline to register
as Republicans
to vote.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Which was last
fall, or was
it more recently?
TAMARA KEITH: No, it like three
weeks ago,
I think.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Oh, OK.
TAMARA KEITH: So there are all
kinds of small
details, and Trump has been
working on the
bigger stuff, on the big
message, on getting
this tidal wave of support.
And that is different from what
happens at
a convention, which is why
Donald Trump really
wants to win before a
convention.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Amy, just
quickly on this,
when he says it's crooked and
his delegate
hunter says they're using
gestapo-like tactics,
is there anything...
AMY WALTER: There's one thing
that we have
seen about this.
Look, this is still is something
of a Wild
West. There are not really any
rules about
what you can and can't do to woo
a delegate.
Theoretically, you can't give
them actual
cash, right? There are bribery
statutes. But
some people are arguing, Well,
as long as
they're not an elected official,
I don't know
if it's considered a bribe to
give them, I
don't know, maybe a trip on a
nice airplane
with the name Trump on the side
of it.
TAMARA KEITH: Gold-plated seat
belts on that
plane?
AMY WALTER: Maybe.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, let's
quickly move over
to the Democrats,, because,
Tamara, yes, does
-- the words of war between
Hillary Clinton
and Bernie Sanders does seem to
have cooled
down a little bit. But, as we
heard, they're
still taking shots at...
TAMARA KEITH: I don't know if it
really cooled
down or not.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Maybe it hasn't.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But where does it
stand? She's
ahead in the polls in New York,
but he is
saying, I have won the last
umpteen contests
here.
TAMARA KEITH: Right. And he has
won the last
umpteen contests, and he has
momentum.
One interesting thing, though,
about that
momentum is, in Wyoming, which
held its caucuses
over the weekend, he won, and he
won fairly
significantly, but, in the end,
the delegates
were a tie. They both got seven
delegates,
seven pledged delegates, which
means that
he didn't eat into her delegate
lead any at
all.
And he still needs to win about
57.5 percent
of the remaining delegates.
Totally possible.
Not easy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And here,
quickly, Amy, delegates'
numbers, very different from the
Republicans,
where you have got the so-called
superdelegates,
and she, Hillary Clinton, way
ahead...
AMY WALTER: Well, way ahead with
the superdelegates,
but also she is significantly
ahead with delegates,
even further ahead today than
Barack Obama
was ahead of her at this point
in 2008.
So, her argument is, what she
would like to
see is, I want to switch now,
this race is
basically mathematically over, I
want to get
to the general election. But you
know what?
Primary voters aren't there yet.
They want
to see this contest continue.
And she has
got to be able to do. She has
got to be able
to show graciousness as the
front-runner and
the likely nominee, while also
being able
to be a general election
candidate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And pivot to
Donald Trump,
which she's started to do. She
is running
ads on him.
At the same time, she's having
to beat off
the criticisms from Sanders.
TAMARA KEITH: Yes, and what she
said today
is that she can walk and chew
gum at the same
time. She can fight Bernie
Sanders and Donald
Trump at the same time.
Sanders is out with an ad about
fracking,
which is an issue that is going
to be more
of an issue in Pennsylvania. And
he's getting
that out there, I think, in
hopes of it coming
up at the debate.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, there is so
much. And
we love having both of you.
Tamara Keith, Amy Walter, thank
you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we continue
our series
Inside Kenya.
The World Bank says Kenya is
growing faster
than any other sub-Saharan
African country.
But there is one major
impediment to the country's
continued growth.
Tonight, in partnership with the
Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting,
special correspondent
Nick Schifrin and producer Zach
Fannin examine
the reality of Kenyan
corruption.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In Kenya, even
the world's
fastest men can't outrun
corruption.
The Rift Valley is known as the
Valley of
Champions. The best marathon
runners are born
here and train here.
Mind if I join you?
Hillary Kiplimo runs three times
a day. He
is tireless and fast. He
averages about 4.5
minutes a mile. It's tough to
keep up.
Whoa. He's good. And that's slow
for him.
After years of training, he
finally broke
through. He finished third in
last year's
Nairobi Marathon.
HILLARY KIPLIMO, Marathon
Runner: This is
for position.
NICK SCHIFRIN: So, it says
number three, because
you came in third.
HILLARY KIPLIMO: Yes.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He and his wife
thought he'd
finally fulfilled his dream of
running his
way out of poverty. But his
dream's been denied.
So, you got your medal, you got
this number
three, you got the jersey and
you got this,
but you never got a cent.
HILLARY KIPLIMO: I never got a
cent.
NICK SCHIFRIN: On the results
Web site, his
name was replaced. And his
$3,500 winnings
vanished.
So, where's the money going?
HILLARY KIPLIMO: I think those
people, they
kept the money.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Athletics Kenya,
the race organizers.
HILLARY KIPLIMO: Yes.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Last November,
dozens of runners
protested at Athletics Kenya.
The group has
exclusive oversight of all
Kenyan athletes.
Kenyans hold records in nearly
every distance.
They say, as they run faster,
Athletics Kenya
steals more. Athletics Kenya
didn't respond
to a half-dozen e-mails from
"PBS NewsHour."
Hillary suspects there's only
way to get their
attention.
HILLARY KIPLIMO: When you go to
explain, they
ask you for something.
NICK SCHIFRIN: They're asking
you to give
them some money?
HILLARY KIPLIMO: Yes.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The problem
extends far beyond
athletics. There's a saying
here: Kenya is
the homeland of the bribe. And
in the mostly
Muslim neighborhood of
Eastleigh, Nairobi,
the victims of those bribes
point their finger
at one perpetrator.
ABDULLAHI MOHAMED, Kenya: If you
look at the
police who are meant to protect
them, they
just arrest them to extort cash.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Abdullahi Mohamed
and most
of this community are Ethnic
Somali. He says
police come here not to patrol,
but to get
rich.
ABDULLAHI MOHAMED: You see cars
from all police
stations in Nairobi converging
here.
NICK SCHIFRIN: They refer to
this neighborhood
as what?
ABDULLAHI MOHAMED: ATM machine.
NICK SCHIFRIN: An ATM machine,
because they
take so much money.
ABDULLAHI MOHAMED: They take so
much money.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Police officers,
when promised
anonymity, admit they're more
focused on keeping
the cash than keeping the peace.
How were police officers
extorting people
in Eastleigh?
MAN: The little amount that you
are paid as
salary cannot get up for you and
your family.
So, if somebody gives you some
amount somewhere,
you have to take the money and
then you forget
about work.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Is this
corruption being practiced
by so many police officers in so
many different
areas?
MAN: Of course, of course. It's
right from
the junior officer to the
higher-most.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And the problem
is, when the
police are for sale, criminals
buy their freedom.
MAN: A criminal can come, do
anything that
they want, they go free. You
will pay and
you go free.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And while police
let criminals
free, they arrest
anti-corruption campaigners
like 32-year-old Boniface
Mwangi. In a country
where activist is a dirty word,
Mwangi is
a fearless, relentless
firebrand.
BONIFACE MWANGI, Activist: The
corruption
in this country starts from the
presidency
to the judiciary to the
legislature. So, all
arms of the government are
rotten.
We are here today because the
people we elected
are thieves.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He is a former
journalist whose
political activism is often a
performance.
He covered pigs with fake blood
outside Parliament.
BONIFACE MWANGI: Pigs are
selfish. And our
members of Parliament are like
pigs. If you
steal a lot of money, you go
into politics
and you buy yourself immunity.
You can get
away with anything in this
country, provided
you have the money to buy your
way off.
Every sector in this section is
affected by
corruption.
NICK SCHIFRIN: He might be
considered over
the top, except what he's
fighting is so outrageous.
Last year, schoolkids protested
when a landowner
confiscated their playground to
build a parking
lot.
BONIFACE MWANGI: They
tear-gassed innocent
kids who only wanted to access
their playground.
Other countries have mafia. In
Kenya, the
mafia have a country.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The wealth gap
here makes the
corruption more egregious.
According to one
study, Kenyans pay on average 16
bribes every
month. And in a city where the
bus fare is
less than a dollar a ride,
members of Parliament
here makes 188 times the average
salary, which
is the equivalent of a member of
the U.S.
Congress making $8.5 million
every year.
JOHN GITHONGO, Activist: The
moral authority
of this regime to do anything
about corruption
is zero. We have never had that
before.
NICK SCHIFRIN: What do people
know you as?
JOHN GITHONGO: The
anti-corruption guy.
NICK SCHIFRIN: John Githongo
knows better
than anyone how a government
becomes corrupt.
He was the former government's
anti-corruption
czar who became a
whistle-blower. He says
today's corruption is getting
worse.
JOHN GITHONGO: The corruption we
have now
poses an existential risk to
Kenya. Before,
we stole from ourselves. Now,
with the Eurobond,
we are mortgaging the futures of
our children.
WOMAN: The alleged missing
Eurobond funds.
MAN: The Eurobond money had been
misused.
MAN: We are in the middle of a
great con game.
NICK SCHIFRIN: What's missing?
ALEX OWINO, Whistle-Blower: Nine
hundred and
ninety-nine U.S. dollars.
NICK SCHIFRIN: So, $999 million
are missing?
ALEX OWINO: I would prefer the
word unaccounted
for.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Alex Owino used
to work at
the national treasury. Last
year, he blew
the whistle on Eurobond. He
calls it a scheme
to steal a billion dollars.
A billion dollars goes missing.
I mean, how
is that even possible?
ALEX OWINO: It's almost brazen.
If you look
at it, it's almost like a
smash-and-grab heist.
NICK SCHIFRIN: In 2014, the
Kenyan government
issued a bond on the Irish Stock
Exchange
known as a Eurobond, $2.85
billion invested
by J.P. Morgan Chase and
Citibank.
UHURU KENYATTA, Kenyan
President: By accessing
these external funds, we will
spur economic
growth, and provide more
employment opportunities
to our people.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Was the pitch a
lie?
ALEX OWINO: As it turned out
now, the pitch
and what exactly transpired are
very different.
NICK SCHIFRIN: What transpired
were violent
protests, because the treasury
was so empty,
the government couldn't issue
student loans
or pay teachers' salaries.
ALEX OWINO: If you just borrowed
$2 billion,
why are we in this problem?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Late last year,
the treasury
released documents it called
proof the money
arrived in Kenya, according to
Kenya's top
anti-corruption officer, Halakhe
Waqo.
HALAKHE WAQO, Kenyan
Anti-Corruption Official:
All the money that was intended
to be brought
to Kenya has been brought back
to Kenya.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But Owino says
those documents
are fake. The invoice numbers
seem falsified.
ALEX OWINO: For instance, start
at number
25. The second one is going the
wrong way
and the third one is number 25,
which is the
same as the first one.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And another
document is redacted,
hiding the recipient of the
money.
ALEX OWINO: It definitely casts
doubt immediately
on whether they're authentic or
not.
NICK SCHIFRIN: How do you
investigate the
government when it is the
government that
is allowing you to keep your job
and that
is funding this organization?
HALAKHE WAQO: Thank you very
much.
We are investigating government
projects on
a daily basis. It is our
responsibility to
investigate the government.
NICK SCHIFRIN: President Uhuru
Kenyatta has
denied wrongdoing. And he
threatens anyone
who a accuses him of corruption
without proof.
UHURU KENYATTA: If you make
accusations, and
fail to prove them, you too will
also be held
accountable.
MAN: Thank you very much.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The threats are
effective.
When average Kenyans stand up to
corruption,
they often lose everything.
What happens to people in Kenya
who try and
fight corruption?
DANIEL MWIRIGI, Kenya: You will
be targeted,
and you will be very unfairly
treated.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Fifteen years
ago, Daniel Mwirigi
investigated fraud at a Kenya's
Postbank.
He discovered bank officers were
stealing
Western Union transactions. But
when he reported
the crime, he says his bosses
colluded to
frame him with the very crimes
he had exposed.
DANIEL MWIRIGI: The fraudsters
were within.
NICK SCHIFRIN: You found these
fraudulent
transactions?
DANIEL MWIRIGI: Yes.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And you
investigated them.
DANIEL MWIRIGI: I investigated
them.
NICK SCHIFRIN: And, eventually,
they would
charge you.
DANIEL MWIRIGI: With the same.
NICK SCHIFRIN: With the same
exact things.
DANIEL MWIRIGI: Yes.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It took him
nearly two years
to clear his name. By then, he'd
lost his
job, health, and reputation for
good.
DANIEL MWIRIGI: My father was
alive that time.
He has died thinking that I am a
thief. My
mother was alive. She has died
thinking that
I'm a thief. There's no point of
doing a good
job in this country. The future
generations
are doomed.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Kenyans refer to
stealing as
eating. Today, Kenyans say they
watch the
rich and the powerful get fat,
while the people
starve.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Nick
Schifrin
in Nairobi, Kenya.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": the
complex link
between income and life
expectancy; a Ken
Burns documentary on the legacy
of baseball
hero Jackie Robinson; and a new
drama from
the playwright of "August: Osage
County."
But, first, we turn to the
effort to catalog
war crimes in real time during
the ongoing
Syrian civil war.
Hari Sreenivasan has that story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Five years of
war have killed
hundreds of thousands of people
in Syria in
this many-sided and brutal
conflict. But there's
now a project under way that's
trying to document
the principal role of the Bashar
al-Assad
regime in the killing and its
systematic campaign
of detention, torture and
murder.
The story of this remarkable
forensic effort
and the appalling acts it
catalogs is told
in this week's "New Yorker" by
reporter Ben
Taub in his piece called "The
Assad Files."
Ben Taub joins me now.
So, what is this organization?
It's not the
United Nations. It's not the
International
Criminal Court. But it seems
almost more effective
in the amount of evidence that
it's gathered
on what's happening in Syria.
BEN TAUB, "The New Yorker":
Right.
So, it's an independent agency
called the
Commission for International
Justice and Accountability.
And because they're independent,
they don't
-- they have a -- they can
operate with a
very high risk tolerance and
outside of the
geopolitics that usually govern
permissions
for such AN investigation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But what's the
type of evidence
that they have now and how do we
know that
Assad is responsible for some of
these acts?
BEN TAUB: So, they have
collected documentation
evidence from all over the
country. They have
smuggled about 600,000 pages out
of Syria
at very high risk. They have had
-- one courier
was killed, two have been
wounded, and -- but
in recent years, they have
gotten much better
with operational security.
And they have also...
HARI SREENIVASAN: These are
basically people
who are deciding to leak
documents and somehow
get it in the hands of the CIJA.
BEN TAUB: So there is a leaker
from Damascus.
He was -- he worked within
Assad's innermost
security committee as a -- as a
mole essentially.
He was hired basically to
process all of the
paperwork for Assad's innermost
security committee.
And he was a member of the
opposition from
the beginning. And so it's from
his testimony
that we know a lot of how that
committee worked.
And he basically saw that, every
single night,
Assad's crisis cell which he
formed in response
to the Syrian crisis in 2011,
and they would
demand security reports from all
over the
country.
And this young man named
Abdelmajid Barakat
would collect all of the
reports, read them
and draft a summary for them to
look at as
they had the meeting. Now, after
their meetings,
when they have decided how to
handle each
security issue, they would send
a list of
recommendations to Assad through
a courier,
and he would then review them,
sometimes cross
things out, sometimes add...
HARI SREENIVASAN: President
Assad would actually
read these reports?
BEN TAUB: Absolutely.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Edit them,
sign them?
BEN TAUB: And then return them
to the crisis
cell.
And once they had clear
instructions, they
would then send them through
their individual
chains of command to the distant
provinces,
where the security agents on the
ground were
actually implementing them to
put down the
revolution.
In practice, the policy itself,
while repressive,
is not inherently criminal,
necessarily. But
in the course of its
implantation, tens of
thousands of Syrians were
detained for months
or even years, tortured into
false confessions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So tell me the
story of
Mazen al-Hamada, a character
that you use
to do detail some of the
atrocities that are
happening in Syria.
BEN TAUB: Yes, so Hamada, he was
an activist
in Deir el-Zour, came from a
middle-class
family, worked for an oil
company. So when
he was arrested in early 2012,
he was dragged
into the air force intelligence
branch in
al-Mezzeh Military Airport.
And he was after a couple of
months in detention,
with no idea where he was at
this point, he
was taken into an interrogation
room and he
was first tortured by -- they
burned out cigarettes
on his body. They beat him. They
strung him
up by his wrists, so that his
feet were off
the ground, and he felt his
wrists were going
to get cut off.
All the while, they were
interrogating him
over the same questions that the
crisis cell
had devised in its plan to put
down the revolution.
HARI SREENIVASAN: At one point,
he's so injured
from this process that they move
him to what
they call a hospital.
BEN TAUB: So, Mazen was sent to
Hospital 601,
which is a military hospital.
And this turned
out to be the place where they
would process
the bodies of detainees who had
been killed
in security branches.
He was brought there. And on his
first night,
he had to go to the bathroom.
And a guard
dragged him to the bathroom door
and let him
in. And when he opened the first
bathroom
stall, he saw a pile of bodies.
And he started
to feel like this was -- he was
in a nightmare.
And he went to the second stall
and opened
that, and there were two more
bodies with
their eyes gouged out. And there
was another
body by the sink. And he felt
like he was
losing his grip on reality. He
walked out
to the guard and said, you know,
where am
I supposed to pee? And the guard
told him
to pee on top of the bodies.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How do we
verify his version
of events is true?
BEN TAUB: So, after he was
released, he spoke
to a group of activists and gave
his full
testimony in detail with a
published dateline
back in October 2013 in Arabic.
A few months after that, a
military police
photographer who had defected,
he spoke to
investigators and forensic
analysts, and a
report was leaked. And he had
this collection
of 55,000 pictures with 11,000
bodies in it.
And he was photographing them at
the hospital
where Mazen was staying, and
Mazen's testimony
came out first.
And so his account lines up with
-- it was
later corroborated by a huge
quantity of material.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It seems like
they have
all the necessary ammunition to
prosecute
Assad if he ever gets into a
court.
BEN TAUB: Exactly.
So, they have the chain of
command. And their
thought is that, eventually,
when the international
community catches up and there
is a resolution
to the crisis in Syria, that,
some way or
another, they will be able to
hand over their
evidence to a court that can
prosecute it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The report is
called "The
Assad Files" by Ben Taub in this
week's "New
Yorker."
Thanks so much for joining us.
BEN TAUB: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: the
connections between
income, geography, and life
expectancy.
It's a sobering fact that the
poorest citizens
have shorter life spans than
wealthier Americans.
But new research published finds
that the
gap in life expectancy is
growing. Since 2000,
the wealthiest 5 percent of
Americans can
now expect to live an additional
three years.
For the very poorest, there's
been almost
no change.
And yet research also found that
the poorest
who live in affluent and highly
educated cities
live longer than other poor
Americans.
Raj Chetty is the co-author, and
he's an economist
at Stanford University.
Raj Chetty, welcome to the
program.
Why is this gap in life spans
getting longer
for so many people?
RAJ CHETTY, Professor of
Economics, Stanford
University: Well, Judy, what
we're seeing
is that there is a really
dramatic increase
in life spans for the very
highest-income
Americans throughout the
country.
what's interesting is that, for
the low-income
Americans, say in the bottom 20
percent, we
find that the story is very
heterogeneous
across places. There are some
places like
Birmingham, Alabama, where the
poor are gaining
just as much in life expectancy
as the rich,
but there are other places like
Tampa, Florida,
where the poor actually losing
in terms of
life expectancy, where they live
shorter lives
today than they did in 2000, at
the beginning
of this millennium.
And so in terms of understanding
why we're
seeing this increasing gap, I
think the story
is not just one at the national
level. It's
one that is going to force us to
look at the
local level to understand why
the trend looks
so positive in Birmingham, yet
so negative
in other places like Tampa.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And are there
clues now as
to why that is?
RAJ CHETTY: The places with the
highest levels
of life expectancy for the poor
tend to have
better health behaviors, perhaps
not surprisingly.
These are places with lower
levels of obesity,
higher rates of exercise, lower
levels of
smoking.
They also tend to be cities like
New York
and San Francisco, more
affluent, highly educated,
high-cost-of-living cities,
where the poor
seem to be doing better. Now, we
don't know
exactly why. One potential
hypothesis is that
these types of cities invest a
lot in public
health. They're often the first
cities to
enact things like smoking bans
or bans on
trans fats, which could end up
improving the
health of not just the rich, but
also the
poor.
But that remains to be explored
further.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it's not --
and it's not
just the big cities, the New
Yorks and the
San Franciscos. You said it's a
Birmingham.
It's the medium-sized cities as
well.
RAJ CHETTY: That's right.
It's really remarkable how
diverse the patterns
are around the country. There is
no systematic
bloc of cities where you find
clear gains.
The general patterns are
affluent, educated
cities, but it includes places
like Cincinnati,
Ohio, where we're seeing very
positive trends,
Birmingham, Alabama.
In general, levels of life
expectancy are
highest on the coasts for
low-income people,
California and the Northeast,
and they tend
to be the lowest in Nevada and
then the geographic
belt running through the middle
of the country,
including states like Oklahoma
and Detroit,
Michigan, and so forth.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And what did you
find with
regard to gender, in terms of
women at both
ends of the income scale, and
men?
RAJ CHETTY: We find large gaps
in life expectancy
in the U.S. as a whole between
the highest-
and lowest-income Americans for
both men and
women.
For men, being in the top 1
percent of the
income distribution gives you a
life that's
about 15 years longer, on
average, than men
in the bottom 1 percent of the
income distribution.
For women, the gap is 10 years,
still large
but not quite as large.
And what's interesting, Judy,
about the gender
difference is that it's well
known that women
tend to live longer than men on
average, but
we find that that's much more
true at low-income
levels. Among low-income
families, women live
about six or seven years longer
than men.
At the highest income levels,
women live only
about one year longer than men.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
what questions
does this lead you to? What do
you want to
know next in order to understand
this better?
RAJ CHETTY: Well, what this
research shows
us is that there is a great deal
of inequality
in life expectancy in America,
but it's not
inevitable.
There are some places in America
where gaps
in health outcomes and life
expectancy are
much smaller, and what I think
that shows
us is that we can learn from
those places,
places like New York and San
Francisco, and
places like on a positive
trajectory like
Birmingham and Cincinnati, learn
what those
places are doing right, and
hopefully translate
those lessons to other areas to
reduce inequality
and help outcomes more broadly.
The question going forward is,
what exactly
is the recipe to do that? And
our hope is
that these data that we have put
out in this
study will be useful in helping
researchers
and policy-makers figure that
out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Raj Chetty,
economics professor
at Stanford University, thank
you.
RAJ CHETTY: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can hear
more from
Raj Chetty about the long-term
implications
of disparities, both racial and
economic,
by watching a recent interview
he did on our
Web site. It's part of our
ongoing series
Race Matters. That's at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now: the legacy of one of
baseball's greatest,
Jackie Robinson, on and off the
field.
It's the focus of a new
documentary that begins
on PBS tonight.
John Yang has our look.
JOHN YANG: The four-hour program
was produced
by Ken Burns and airs over two
nights, interesting
tomorrow night. It's narrated by
Keith David,
with Jamie Foxx reading Jackie
Robinson's
words.
It seeks to show a deeper and
fuller view
of Robinson's achievements and
challenges.
Here's a short excerpt about how
Jackie was
treated after Brooklyn Dodgers
president Branch
Rickey selected him to break the
color barrier.
We should warn you, though, that
the documentary
is explicit about the epithets
and racist
language that Robinson endured,
and some of
that is in this clip.
KEITH DAVID, Narrator: Robinson
faced everything
Rickey said he would. Pitchers
threw at his
head. More than once, runners
sprinting towards
first base spiked Robinson with
their cleats,
and a hard slide by Robinson
wouldn't go unnoticed
by opposing infielders.
Before Brooklyn played Ben
Chapman's Phillies
in Philadelphia, Branch Rickey
received a
call from the president of the
team. "Don't
bring the nigger here," he said.
"We're just
not ready for that sort of thing
yet."
MAN: And Rickey said, well,
"He's a member
in good standing of the National
League, and
if you don't want to play us, we
will accept
the forfeit of the game."
JAMIE FOXX, Actor: "You thought
of Philadelphia
as the city of brotherly love,
but yet when
you went to Philadelphia, you
couldn't stay
in the same hotel. You had to
find your own
accommodations. And then there
was Ben Chapman
and some of the other Phillies,
who were vicious
and uncalled for."
KEITH DAVID: During one game,
Cubs shortstop
Len Merullo kicks Jackie as they
untangle
themselves after a close play at
second. As
the Brooklyn bench should at
Merullo, Jackie
angrily picked himself up, but
didn't strike
back.
JOHN YANG: The documentary lays
out what Robinson
went through as a player, as a
leader, and,
after his baseball career ended,
as a civil
rights figure.
Let's get some personal
perspective on this
from Dusty Baker. He was a
player for 19 years,
notably with the Atlanta Braves
and Los Angeles
Dodgers. He's been a manager for
two decades
and is now manager of the
Washington Nationals.
He joins from his office at Nats
Park.
Mr. Baker, thanks for being with
us.
So much of the focus about
Jackie Robinson
is about that one year, the year
he broke
the color barrier, but I don't
think a lot
of people realize the influence
he had on
players long after his playing
career had
ended. Talk about the direct
link between
Jackie Robinson and you through
Hank Aaron.
DUSTY BAKER, Manager, Washington
Nationals:
Well, actually, it started with
my parents.
And, you know, most -- at that
time, most
African-American parents, if
they were baseball
fans, they were Dodger fans
because of Jackie
Robinson. So, you know, my dad
used to tell
me all the time, you know, what
would Jackie
do in that situation if I was
fighting or
something.
And then I was fortunate enough
to have played
with Hank Aaron with the Atlanta
Braves. And
Hank told me he went to see
Jackie when he
was a youngster and how much
influence he
had on him. And, you know, I was
close to
Hank. I was with Hank, you know,
most days
from 19 to 25 years or 24 years
old.
And, you know, Hank -- I got to
meet most
of the civic leaders of our time
at that time.
You know, Maynard Jackson,
Andrew Young, Jesse
Jackson, I got to meet all those
through Hank.
And Jackie Robinson meant a lot
to me because
of my dad and because of, you
know, Hank Aaron.
And my mom was an African
studies teacher,
so we knew all about Jackie
Robinson.
JOHN YANG: Do you think young
African-American
players today appreciate the
legacy of Jackie
Robinson?
DUSTY BAKER: Probably not. I
don't think it's
the African-American players'
fault, necessarily,
of not appreciating Jackie
Robinson. I don't
think we have done a very good
job of, you
know, passing along history, not
only of Jackie
Robinson, but the fact of, you
know, in America,
it seems like that's what people
like -- spend
the most -- I mean, the least
amount of time
studying is history.
So, you know, some of us have
made a conscientious
effort to try to pass along that
history,
because if we don't pass along
that history,
you know, it's going to die. I
pass it on
to my son. My son comes in my
office in the
weight room at the house and he
sees, you
know, different players. He saw
-- he told
me, he said, "Dad, I didn't know
Jackie played
ball in Cuba."
And I took my family to Cuba a
few years ago,
and so there was a lot that
people don't know
about Jackie. They don't know he
went to the
military. You know, there is a
whole bunch
of things. But I will tell you,
he was -- and
I asked Jim Gilliam.
One of the first questions I
asked him, I
said, why did he die and how did
he die so
young? And Jim Gilliam told me
at that time
that he thought that Jackie died
of a broken
heart. And I really didn't
understand it,
but the longer I live, you know,
the more
it's understandable.
JOHN YANG: What do you think
that Jackie Robinson
would think of the situation
today? You have
got 8 percent of Major League
Baseball players
are African-American. You have a
handful,
a very -- you're one of a very
small number
of African-American managers.
You're the second winningest
active manager,
but still almost didn't have a
job going into
this season. What do you think
of the state
of diversity in baseball today?
DUSTY BAKER: You know, when I
first came into
the game, I was on the Braves.
We had, I think,
a combination of, I don't know,
eight to 10
African-Americans and Latin
players when I
first came into the game. And so
it's definitely
gotten worse. It hasn't gotten
better.
But, at the same time, you know,
we have time
to do something about it. And,
you know, I
have spoken to the commissioner.
You know,
he's very aware of it. You know,
he doesn't
like it. He told me that he's
glad that I
got a job, because, at the time,
this would
have been thee first time in 27
years when
there wasn't an African-American
manager.
And it seems like, you know, we
have to do
twice as good to accomplish the
same thing.
And, you know, the scrutiny of
being one of
the few black, African-American
managers,
you know, is tremendous. And
sometimes you
feel like you're carrying the
weight of, you
know, the whole race sometimes,
personally
on this side.
But, on the other hand, that's
what I feel
that I was chosen, you know, for
God to do,
because, you know, here I am in
the nation's
capital, and here I am with this
outstanding
team, best team I have had to
start with.
And I feel that, you know, great
things are
ahead for us on the Nationals
and hopefully
us in America.
JOHN YANG: Very good.
Well, Dusty Baker,
congratulations the fast
start. Good luck the rest of the
way, and
thanks for being with us.
DUSTY BAKER: All right, you're
welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A new play by one
of the nation's
leading playwrights who's known
for his domestic
dramas asks the question, what
makes us us?
Jeffrey Brown went to Chicago,
where his latest
play opened this weekend to find
out.
JEFFREY BROWN: Eleven scenes
that capture
the life of a woman, from
infancy to age 69,
but it's told out of
chronological order.
And she's played by six
different actresses.
"Mary Page Marlowe," the new
play by Tracy
Letts, is just now opening.
MAN: It sounds different every
time you do
it.
JEFFREY BROWN: But when I
visited in early
March, rehearsals had just
begun. And when
I said it was odd to be there
talking about
a play I hadn't seen, Letts
reminded me of
something rather important if
you happen to
be the playwright.
TRACY LETTS, Playwright: I
haven't seen it
either.
JEFFREY BROWN: You haven't seen
it either.
Do you know what you have at
this point?
TRACY LETTS: Normally, at this
point, you
have a pretty good sense of what
you have.
But "Mary Page Marlowe" is an
unusual piece,
the nonlinear narrative, the
different women
playing the character. I think I
know what
we have got, but until there's
an audience
in the room, I won't really
know.
JEFFREY BROWN: Letts, now 50, is
best known
for the Tony- and Pulitzer
Prize-winning play
"August: Osage County," later
made into a
film. It tells of an Oklahoma
family in, as
a "New York Times" review put
it, in near
apocalyptic meltdown of
dysfunctional behavior.
Letts is also an acclaimed
actor. He won a
Tony Award in 2013 for his role
in another
famous dysfunctional
relationship drama, Edward
Albee's "Who's Afraid of
Virginia Woolf?"
More recently, he's starred in
the TV drama
"Homeland" and the film "The Big
Short."
TRACY LETTS: The housing market
is rock-solid.
JEFFREY BROWN: The new play has
its own share
of unruly behavior, but its
focus is the deep
subject of identity.
TRACY LETTS: If you sit at all
in the question
of what makes you you, and you
start to ask
yourself, is it my parents, my
background,
my geographical background, my
age, my gender,
what are the things that make
you you?
ACTRESS: We pretend I'm making
decisions about
my life. I am not. I haven't.
JEFFREY BROWN: Letts says he was
inspired
to write the play after the
death of his mother
18 months ago.
TRACY LETTS: You spend a lot of
time and reflection
about your parents' life, their
journey. "Mary
Page Marlowe" is not my mother,
though she's
inspired by my mother, and she's
inspired
by the idea that we are
different people at
different points in our life.
In fact, my 17-year-old self
wouldn't recognize
the man I am now. And I don't
recognize him
much either.
JEFFREY BROWN: So that makes
life a constant
surprise, right?
TRACY LETTS: Maybe it speaks to
some -- to
something in me I have -- some
searching in
me. I don't know. I know that
I'm a hell of
a lot more comfortable at 50,
comfortable
with who I am than I was with
myself at 30
or at 17.
The monologue, I'm still working
on it.
JEFFREY BROWN: Some of the
comfort clearly
comes from his long association
with Chicago's
Steppenwolf Theatre Company, a
renowned incubator,
with an ensemble of writers and
actors who've
had a major influence on the
world of American
theater and beyond.
TRACY LETTS: I can afford to
take chances.
I can afford to make a fool of
myself.
JEFFREY BROWN: Because they will
keep you
around anyway.
TRACY LETTS: They will keep me
around anyway,
and they will tell me, they will
tell me to
my face, you didn't get this
right.
ANNA SHAPIRO, Director: Here are
a couple
of things that I think might
help.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of those
truth-tellers
is longtime friend and
collaborator Anna Shapiro,
who's directed numerous plays at
Steppenwolf
and on Broadway, and was
recently named the
company's artistic director.
She's now taken
on "Mary Page Marlowe."
ANNA SHAPIRO: Have a really
inappropriate
response.
JEFFREY BROWN: The first big
challenge of
this play, Shapiro said, was to
make sure
that a story that jumps around
chronologically
didn't feel out of order.
ANNA SHAPIRO: You just have to
kind of expand
your definition of what is
chronology. I'm
not sure life is happening in
order anyway.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes, the way a
life unfolds
and -- yes.
ANNA SHAPIRO: The way life
feels. The way
life feels. I just think when
you get older
-- and I think Tracy and I are
getting a little
bit older -- you do start to
understand the
kind of inevitable arbitrariness
of life.
And it feels unrelentingly
arbitrary.
CARRIE COON, Actress: Really?
You don't know?
JEFFREY BROWN: We watched an
early rehearsal,
in which Mary Page at age 36 is
talking to
her therapist. She's played by
Tracy Letts'
wife, Carrie Coon.
During a key monologue, director
Anna Shapiro
was bothered.
ANNA SHAPIRO: My ear is jumping
at "someone
called."
JEFFREY BROWN: After some
discussion, the
playwright came up with a new
line.
TRACY LETTS: "I just found out
my college
girlfriend Lorna died from
breast cancer last
month, and I'm sitting here
talking about
compartments."
ANNA SHAPIRO: That's awesome.
JEFFREY BROWN: The tweaking,
Letts told me
later at his home as he and Coon
made dinner,
would continue.
TRACY LETTS: Every time I write
a new play,
we sit down, we read the thing,
and the fear
is that people are going to say,
this is garbage
and they are going to take it
and they're
going to throw it away and say,
you have done
something just terrible.
The hope is that they're going
to carry me
out of the theater on their
shoulders, carry
me down the street, saying, he's
a genius,
he's a genius. But the reality
is that good,
smart people working around me
say, OK, let's
get to work.
JEFFREY BROWN: Letts and Coon
met as actors
in "Who's Afraid Of Virginia
Woolf?"
CARRIE COON: It's really hard to
find good
roles for women, and my husband
happens to
be one of those people who's
actually writing
roles that dignify women,
because he deeply
respects them. And everybody in
his plays,
they're all in there somewhere,
all the people.
So I feel like I'm married to a
lot of people.
It's exciting. It's never
boring.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: A nice domestic
scene, with
a playwright renowned for the
very opposite.
So where does all that
dysfunction come from?
TRACY LETTS: It's drama. If I
wrote -- if
I just wrote about the healthy
side of myself,
it wouldn't be very interesting
or dramatic.
CARRIE COON: A married couple
makes aloo gobi
in the kitchen.
(LAUGHTER)
TRACY LETTS: It doesn't make for
a great scene.
CARRIE COON: He cuts the
potatoes too small.
She's irritated, but she doesn't
saying anything.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Not great
theater, perhaps,
but a fine dinner.
From Chicago, I'm Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS
NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, finally, a
news update.
More than 400 protesters were
arrested for
demonstrating on the front of
the U.S. Capitol
today, Capitol Police said. The
group organizing
the sit-in, Democracy Spring,
said they were
protesting -- quote -- "the
corruption of
big money in our politics." Most
are being
charged with unlawful crowding
and obstruction.
Tonight on "Charlie Rose":
tonight on Charlie
rose, Rafael Correa, president
of Ecuador.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday: a New York City
program that promises
to double community college
graduation rates.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening. For all of us at the
"PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.